Welcome, brothers and sisters to JW Broadcasting.
In this edition, we'll glorify Jehovah's name and our discussions and segments.
For example, how was the discovery of this ancient manuscript a tremendous help to the New World Bible Transition Committee?
How did it support their decision to restore God's name in the Christian Greek Scriptures?
We'll find out.
We'll visit the Ketua-speaking people in the Andes Mountains.
What special efforts have our brothers been making there to spread the good news?
And what new tools do they have to glorify God's name in Ketua?
How did you feel when you finally found Jehovah?
And how does it feel now when you can help someone in his or her search to know the true God?
You'll enjoy a new original song about the search for Jehovah.
You're watching JW Broadcasting for October 2018.
It's hard to believe that it's already been five years since the release of the revised New World Translation in English.
What a wonderful blessing from Jehovah it has been.
Do you remember why the governing body saw the need for a revised edition?
One reason was to honor God's name, including it in six more places where new evidence made it possible.
Another reason to revise the English text was to allow Bible translation into even more languages.
Thousands of questions from Bible translation teams showed where the English text could be made more clear and understandable without sacrificing accuracy.
It's our prayer that in time more of our brothers can have a revised New World translation in their language.
The governing body feels that Jehovah is answering that prayer.
Revised translations are now available in 13 languages.
Listen to brothers and sisters from four European language groups explain how the revised Bible has benefited them in their study and their ministry.
The release of the revised version of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures in English language in 2013 had a wonderful impact on the English-speaking world.
As Brother Jackson noted, more than 60 years had passed since the release of the first volume of the New World Translation and during that time the English language had changed as well.
During 2017, the revised version of the New World Translation of the Holy Scriptures has been released in some major European languages such as Italian, originally released in 1963,
Dutch also originally released in 1963, Greek originally released in 1997, and Hungarian originally released in 2000.
How do the brothers and sisters feel about the revised New World Translation in their particular language?
The modern language in this revised version of the Bible helped me to understand Bible passages because now it flows better and is much simpler.
This helps me to meditate more on what I have just read.
In Numbers 1424, Jehovah speaks to Moses.
In the older version, Jehovah says about Caleb that a different spirit has proved to be with him.
In the revised version, the verse reads,
My servant Caleb thinks differently. Very clear? Doesn't need further explanation.
Some 7.9 now says that Jehovah examines the hearts and the deepest emotions, whereas previously it said he examines the hearts and the kidneys.
Now it's easier to understand.
Besides all the aspects helping to get a better understanding of God's Word, why are brothers and sisters happy to use this revised version in Field Service?
When reading the scripture, you can tell people understand it more quickly. There's less need to explain more, and that's great.
I particularly like the Glossary. It's a kind of many insight book. It has been very useful when I study and also in the ministry.
Furthermore, I like that at the beginning of the Bible there are 20 introductions that answer questions that people in the territory often ask,
and they have Bible verses and very nice illustrations, so they are very clear and practical.
To achieve such an awesome result by revising the New World translation, which important aspects did the translators have to keep in mind?
Thanks to the modern language that is used in the revision, readers can understand most Bible passages as they read them, without having to stop and read them over again.
This is possible in part because the text is not cluttered with too many words, trying to copy the Hebrew syntax and style of expression.
Thus, the use of modern language contributes to naturalness and clarity.
The language used in the revision now also allows the emotions of the characters to come through more vividly.
You straightaway notice when someone is angry or desperate or sad, like in Matthew 11, when Jesus invites us to take his yoga upon us. His warmth is immediately obvious.
In the 2003 edition, only one sentence was packed into these seven verses, and its length was half a column, making it very cumbersome to follow the line of thought.
In the revised Bible, this part was cut into more sentences, so it is easier to grasp the idea.
Many parents have told us that now when they read the Bible with their children, they don't have to stop to explain words, but the reading is much more enjoyable.
The revised New World translation will be made available in more languages in the near future.
We know that Jehovah wants all his people to listen as he speaks to them in clear, understandable language.
This will help us to come to know Jehovah even better, and our love for him will keep growing, while we read his word with joy.
In addition to being clear and accurate, what should be the primary goal of any Bible translation?
The answer is found in the theme of our program this month.
Father, glorify your name.
It's based on Jesus' words recorded at John 12 and verse 28.
Let's start by examining the context of those words as found in verses 27 and 28.
Now, I am troubled, and what should I say? Father, save me out of this hour.
Nevertheless, this is why I have come to this hour. Father, glorify your name. Then a voice came out of heaven.
I have glorified it, and will glorify it again.
Jesus uttered these words just four days before his agonizing death.
But even though Jesus was very troubled about what was soon to happen to him, what was his primary concern?
It was for Jehovah's name to be glorified.
We today are likewise concerned about the glorification of Jehovah's name and his reputation.
But how can someone be glorified or made famous if nobody knows his name?
Knowing God's personal name, Jehovah, is closely tied in with glorifying his reputation.
In fact, knowing Jehovah's name is the very first step in that process.
The June 2015 program of JW Broadcasting discussed why God's personal name should appear in all translations of the Bible.
You might find it helpful to review that program.
But this month, we will consider another aspect of this subject that is far more controversial, namely, should the divine name appear in the Christian Greek scriptures, or what is commonly called the New Testament?
Many scholars who agree with us that the divine name should appear in the Hebrew scriptures disagree with our use of the same name in the New Testament.
So what prompted the translators of the New World translation to restore the divine name 237 times in the Christian Greek scriptures?
The answer to that question involves some fascinating events that seem to be too amazing to be just coincidence.
It also requires us to do some detective work. Sound intriguing? It is. So let's start our journey together.
First of all, imagine you are back in the late 1940s. The time when the New World Bible translation committee was translating the book of Matthew.
As they started the project, no doubt they realized that Matthew's account contains many quotations from the Hebrew scriptures.
Many of these contain the tetragramaton, that is the divine name in Hebrew letters, in the original text.
For example, let's consider Matthew 22 verse 44. This verse records Jesus quoting the words of Psalm 110 verse 1.
Jehovah said to my Lord, sit at my right hand. But did Jesus use the divine name when making this quote? Or did he substitute the divine name with an equivalent such as Lord?
Well, the brothers would have realized that many editions of the King James version is something very interesting in Matthew 22 44.
In that verse, the English word Lord is written in capital letters. This technique is used throughout the King James version to indicate where the original Hebrew text uses the divine name.
So using Lord and capital letters in this verse, in effect acknowledges that the name of God was originally in this quote.
The implication is that Jesus used God's name when making this quote.
However, in the years prior to the release of the New World translation, many scholars argued that long before Jesus came to earth, the Jewish people had already removed the tetragramaton
from the Greek translation of the Hebrew text, the Septuagand.
If true, that would mean that copies of the Holy writings used in Jesus' day would not have contained the divine name.
So what should the translation committee do? Should they use the divine name in their translation or not?
This is where the story becomes intriguing.
Around that time, some exciting discoveries were made that proved those scholars wrong.
One of these discoveries was documented by the brothers in the Ford of the 1950 edition of the New World translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
It involved some papyri copies of the Septuagand that dated back to around the time of Jesus.
What did these papyri fragments reveal?
Let's find out in this documentary report.
In 1950, the New World translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures was released.
This translation was unique, in that it restored the divine name Jehovah 237 times in the main text of the so-called New Testament.
But how could they do that, considering that for centuries, many Bibles did not use Jehovah's name?
And why did the divine name need to be restored?
The oldest copies we have available do not use the divine name in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
They use substitutes like God or Lord.
Very early on, the copies of those original manuscripts stay simply replaced, they got in the practice of replacing God's name.
We know that it's not a translation because one is a name, the other one is a title, it's not even a synonym for Jehovah for a name.
Since the Greek Scriptures were an inspired addition to the sacred Hebrew Scriptures, in fact, Jehovah's name,
God's name was used some 7,000 times in the Hebrew Scriptures.
The sudden disappearance in the Greek text is inconsistent.
Even though the New World Bible Translation Committee believed that Jehovah's name should appear in the text of the Christian Greek Scriptures,
they also knew that at that time virtually all Bible scholars disagreed with that belief.
Those scholars argued that by the time of Jesus, even the Greek translation of the Hebrew Scriptures, the Septuagint, no longer contained the divine name.
So why would the writers of the New Testament use the divine name when their copies of the Holy Scriptures in Greek did not contain the tetragramatine?
This view was based on faulty information.
How so? Did the Septuagint still use the divine name in Jesus' time?
Let's consider one piece of evidence that answers this question.
Something amazing happened in 1944, a theological journal published a picture of a Greek Septuagint fragment from the Papyrus 4 out 266 collection.
Now inside that fragment, there was the divine name. In the Greek text, you had the tetragramatine, not just once but throughout.
Now this fragment was very old dating back to the first century BCE, but the important point is this was proof, clear proof, that the divine name was originally there.
Two Jehovah's Witnesses were asked to obtain photographs of these fragments which were located in Cairo, Egypt.
New World Translation Committee were very interested in this, because they started translating the Greek Scriptures in 1947.
After obtaining permission, pictures of 12 of the fragments were published in the forward of the New World Translation of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
What amazes me about this is the timing. When our brothers this translation, New World Translation Committee did their research before even translating,
suddenly something was unknown until, essentially in 1944, came to light.
The confirms that the eternal name of God has to be revealed. It cannot no longer be hidden. It should be shown to everyone who wants to worship Jehovah.
This careful preservation supports what Jesus said in prayer at John 1726, when he said to his father,
I have made your name known and will make it known. As Jehovah's Witnesses, we are proud to be a people for his name.
Knowing his name is essential to know Jehovah himself. And the fact that Jehovah has provided this arrangement through his people,
it makes it very clear that he was gathering a people for his name.
This is why this Bible translation is so beautiful, because it brings us closer to Jehovah.
Jehovah is not just a Lord somewhere which could apply to anyone, but he is Jehovah, our God.
He extends his handstands and says, well, I'm Jehovah. Call me by that name.
What an amazing find. They found proof that the divine name in Hebrew letters was included in the text of the Septuagand
that would have been available in Jesus' name. And just at the right time, the time when the members of the translation committee
were making the decision as to whether they should use the name Jehovah in the translation of the Christian Greek scriptures.
We are so happy that the brothers were able to find this information, because these fragments were not released for general publication
until much later in 1971, years after the time when the committee needed to make that vital decision.
But that's not all. Do you remember what other important material was discovered starting in 1947?
It was the Dead Sea Scrolls. Many of these scrolls were dated to around the time when Jesus was on earth.
And what did these scrolls contain over and over again? You guessed it, the tetragramaton, the divine name.
Isn't it interesting that these discoveries were made around the time that our brothers were translating the New World translation?
Is this just coincidence? Or do you see Jehovah's hand in this?
What has happened in the years since that time? It's important to note that the divine name is consistently used in fragments of the Septuagand
that date from the first century BCE and the first century CE.
This has led some scholars to acknowledge the possibility that Jesus and His disciples used the divine name when making these quotations.
But we need to remember that Hebrew scripture quotations account for approximately one-third of the 237 times the New World translation restores the divine name in the Christian Greek scriptures.
So what about the other two-thirds of occurrences? Well, this brings us to the part of our program that involves some detective work.
Imagine that you are a detective and you catch an art thief who is stolen over 200 original pieces of art from various museums and art galleries.
This thief not only stole each piece of art, but he also substituted it with a copy.
So you need to start an investigation and follow the clues.
First of all, you need to find out where each painting was located originally.
Once you have verified that fakes are hanging in those locations, you would be in a position to return the originals to their proper locations.
In a similar way, we have solid evidence that a crime was committed in the second and third century CE.
Apostate Christians removed the divine name from manuscripts of the Bible and replaced it with curious, the Greek word for Lord.
There is much evidence for this conclusion. So they are like the art thief in our illustration.
They stole something valuable when they removed Jehovah's name from the Christian Greek scriptures.
But we have a problem. There are no copies of the Christian Greek scriptures from the first century for us to examine.
The earliest existing manuscripts that would have a bearing on this matter date from the late second century onward,
a time when we know that the crime had already been committed. Jehovah's name had already been removed.
So how do we know where Jehovah's name originally appeared in the Greek text before the apostates removed it?
While just like the detective in our illustration, we need to start an investigation and follow the clues.
To do our work properly, we need to examine every time the word Lord appears in the text and see if it refers to Jehovah, to Jesus, or to some other person with a title Lord.
Basically, there are five clues that will help us to find out where the original artwork that is Jehovah's name needs to be returned to.
Let's scrutinize these clues.
The first clue is, as we've already mentioned, the easiest clue, where the title Lord appears in quotations from the Hebrew scriptures that originally use the divine name.
The second clue is, where the Greek text contains a Hebrew idiom that would normally contain the divine name.
For example, if someone says in English, he escaped by the skin of his, what word do you expect?
Teeth, not I. Yes, the expression is skin of his teeth.
This is similar with Hebrew expressions. Some of these contain the divine name.
For example, the expression found at Matthew 1.20 is the angel of Jehovah.
So whenever we find a Greek translation of a Hebrew idiom that uses the divine name, this is another clue that Jehovah's name should be there.
The third clue is where the term Lord appears in the context surrounding a quotation that is originally attributed to Jehovah.
An example of this is Matthew 1.22. All of this actually came about to fulfill what was spoken by Jehovah through his prophet saying.
The quotation that immediately follows at Matthew 1.23 is taken from Isaiah 7.14.
This is a prophetic message spoken by Jehovah through Isaiah.
The fourth clue is when we see in the Greek text where there is no definite article before curious, the Greek word for Lord, in places where the Greek grammar normally expects a definite article.
This clue may indicate that a proper name, such as Jehovah, originally was there in the text and was removed from later manuscripts and replaced with curious.
To illustrate the importance of this clue, imagine that you are a newspaper reporter who is reporting on a car accident.
You report that Joe Smith, the driver of the vehicle, was killed in the accident.
But just before the story goes to press, your editor informs you that Joe Smith's relatives have not yet been notified of his death.
So you were told to remove his name from the report. You do that. But in doing so, you forget to add the THE before the word driver.
What would happen? Your report would say, as a result of the accident, driver was killed. That sound strange, doesn't it? It sounds like driver is the name of the person killed.
That's because you suppressed the name and forgot to add the appropriate article. That is similar to what our symbolic art thieves did when removing Jehovah's name from the Bible.
An example of this is found in the Greek text of Mark 13 verse 20. In fact, unless Lord had cut short the days, no flesh would be saved.
That sounds like Lord is a name. And clearly, it should be Jehovah's name. That's why the New World translation restores the divine name in this verse.
However, even in cases where the definite article occurs before the word Lord, there may be other strong reasons for viewing Lord as a substitute for the divine name, like the ones we already discussed.
The final clue is where the divine name needs to be added to avoid ambiguity. An example of this is in Mark 5 and verse 19.
There Jesus says to a man he healed, go home to your relatives and report to them all the things Jehovah has done for you and the mercy he has shown you.
How do we know that Lord here refers to Jehovah and not Jesus? Well, in recording the same event, Luke 8 verse 39 uses the Greek word Theos, God, supporting the thought that curious Lord at Mark 5, 19 is used with reference to Jehovah God.
So these five clues help the New World Bible Translation Committee to ascertain where the name Jehovah should be restored to the biblical text.
In this way, they were able to write the wrong that was committed by apostate Christians in the second and third centuries, or in other words, they were able to return the figurative pieces of stolen artwork to their proper places.
If you would like to review these five clues, you will find a detailed explanation in a Pentex C of the study edition of the New World Translation.
You can either find this in the JW Library app or online at Watchtower Online Library.
In the same Pentex C, you will find a list of what we call J references that support these decisions.
But you might ask, what role did these J references play in making these decisions? Well, to help us understand the answer to that question, I'd like to introduce to you a brother with whom I've worked, brother Nicolatas, he's the assistant overseer of translation services.
Nick, thanks so much for being willing to come along and answer some questions for us. Yes, I'm glad to come. Well, now that we've got you here, the first question I'd like to ask you is,
what really are these so-called J references? Well, the J in the J references stands for Jehovah.
And this is mainly a list of Bibles in Hebrew and other languages that use the divine name Jehovah in the main text of the Christian Greek Scriptures, or at least some form of the name Jehovah.
And this list began to be compiled by the New World Bible Translation Committee in the 1940s.
So where would we find a list like that now? Well, originally there was a list of 21 such references in the 1950 edition of the Christian Greek Scriptures.
Then in 1984, 27 such references were included in the reference Bible in English. And since that time, many more J references have been found.
And now the list includes over 90 such translations and reference works. And you can find an up-to-date list in Appendix C4 of the reference Bible.
Very good. So I guess the main question we're interested in asking you is, do these J references prove in themselves that the tetragramatham should be in the Christian Greek Scriptures?
Actually, no, they don't. I'm sure most of us weren't expecting you to say that. So can you expand a little bit more please?
Well, the New World Translation Committee did not rely on the J references as the basis for their decision to restore the divine name in the Christian Greek Scriptures.
You already discussed the basis for the decision earlier in the broadcast.
Rather, these J references provide proof that other translators have made similar decisions when restoring the divine name to their editions of the Christian Greek Scriptures or the so-called New Testament.
So now you're talking about these other Bible translators. Could you give us an example of who you're talking about?
Well, a number of them were well-known Bible scholars. For example, 19th century Lutheran theologian Franz Delech is still considered to be a foremost Bible scholar and a scholar of biblical Hebrew.
Delech's translation of the New Testament in Hebrew was produced in 1877 and it's one of the J references. In fact, it's still one of the best known New Testaments in the Hebrew language.
In that translation, he discerned when to use Jehovah's name in places where the Greek text contains the term Kideos or Lord. The New World Bible translation committee studied all those occurrences from his translation as well as the occurrences and others of the J references.
So how would you summarize what the value is of these J references?
Well, all the J references, including the new ones in the study Bible, represent the view of translators and scholars who arrived at the same conclusion that the New World Bible translation committee did.
Namely, that Jesus Christ and the apostles used the name Jehovah in their teaching and in their writings. And this conclusion is reflected in their translation and reference works.
Very interesting. That's fascinating. So if I've got to write then what you're saying is if we go to appendix C in C3, there we've got a list of the reasons why the brothers and the New World Translation Committee decided to put Jehovah's name in certain verses.
But then C4 is virtually a list of other Bible translations where the translators made exactly the same decision.
That's exactly right. That's good. Well, thank you very much, Nick, for coming along. We really appreciated hearing those expressions from you.
Before you go though, can we ask you please, can you take back the love and greetings and an expression of appreciation to all those hardworking brothers and sisters there in translation services?
Yes, I'd be happy to.
Thank you very much. Why does the organization work so diligently to translate the Bible?
It's not so that we can feel smart when talking to others about the Bible and God's name. No, but it equips us to follow Jesus' example in a ministry and to glorify God's name and make it known to those searching for Him.
This month's original song is entitled The Search. And it shows the joy people feel when they find Jehovah.
We'll find the very priceless pearl of truth, verses seeing questions to God that the search would take us through.
But we carried on with our sales on fire, merchants us out there.
Maybe you once thought similarly to what the lyrics of our song express. Like merchants on a quest, we knew the truth was out there.
What a wonderful privilege it is to find Jehovah and then help others who are still searching. It's an important way we glorify God's name and why we call Jehovah's Witnesses.
Bearing that name is, of course, both a privilege and a responsibility. How so? Brother Robert Serenco explains in this Bethel morning worship.
By the time the Apostle Peter wrote the words of today's text, individuals who were Jews, Praselites, Samaritans, and Gentiles had been brought into the Christian congregation as God's people, the spiritual Israel of God.
In the verse before today's text, Peter outlined what their mission was. Let's open to 1 Peter chapter 2 and read of that.
It's in verses 9 and 10 of 1 Peter 2. He wrote,
but you are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a people for special possession, that you should declare abroad the excellencies of the one who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light, for you were once not a people, but now you are God's people.
And of course, this refers to the spirit anointed members of the congregation who would be responsible for glorifying Jehovah's name as his witnesses.
And this harmonizes with what Peter had said years earlier in the first century governing body meeting as reported in Acts chapter 15.
So let's turn there Acts 15 and we will begin with verse 14.
It says,
And with this the words of the prophets agree just as it is written,
after these things I will return and raise up again the tent of David that is fallen down, I will rebuild his ruins and restore it, so that the men who remain may earnestly seat Jehovah together with people of all the nations, people who are called by my name says Jehovah, who is doing these things.
Now what about the rest of us who are not anointed Christians but who call ourselves Jehovah's Witnesses, are we also God's people, well most certainly, and what a proud honor it is for us to bear the name of the only true God, but with that name goes responsibility, one that other religious groups do not want to take on.
You see, we are under obligation to bear witness to Jehovah, to tell the truth about him, and to expose false teachings that misrepresent Jehovah.
And a classic example of an unscriptural dogma that God's people have exposed is the Trinity, which reminds me of another hoax that fooled many people who should have known better.
It's the true story about a man named Van Migren, a Dutch artist born in 1889, who perpetrated what may have been the most sensational art hoax of all time.
You see, he never won the critical acclaim that he thought he was due as an artist, so to get back at the art critics he decided to demonstrate his talent by producing a painting that would fool them all,
and he set out to imitate the famous 17th century Dutch Impressionist Johannes Vermeer.
Well Van Migren spent four years figuring out how to make a new painting look 300 years old.
The canvas was easy part, he just took a lesser known painting from the 17th century and removed the picture.
His biggest problem was getting oil paint to harden thoroughly, which usually takes 50 years.
He solved it by mixing his pigments with a synthetic resin instead of oil and then baking the canvas.
Well Van Migren produced six paintings that were passed off as Vermeers. His greatest sold in 1937, it was entitled Christ and the Disciples at Emmaus.
The most authoritative art historian of the day said it was a genuine Vermeer masterpiece untouched on the original canvas and that it had no restoration done to it, but in reality it was a fake.
The critics' opinion was taken as gospel in the art world so much that this critic had been nicknamed the Pope.
Eventually though a chemical analysis proved the paint contained an ingredient that had not been discovered until two centuries after Vermeer died and that's what exposed Van Migren as a fraud.
Well something similar went on during the apostasy that took place after the death of the Apostles.
Less than 300 years after the Bible was completed, a Trinitarian added to 1 John 5.7 the words in heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost, and these three are one.
However, this addition does not appear in the oldest Greek manuscripts proving it's a fake, it's a corruption of God's Word, and yet for centuries the churches propagated the Trinity doctrine.
As recently as the 19th century almost all Bible translations had this spurious addition, as late as 1897 Pope Leo XIII upheld the corrupted text of the Latin Vulgate.
Interestingly the New Catholic Encyclopedia comments on this and says that Trinitarian dogma is in the last analysis a late fourth century invention among the Apostolic fathers there had been nothing even remotely approaching such a mentality or perspective.
Well, Jehovah's anointed witnesses firmly rejected Christenham's Trinity dogma. In 1915 the Watchtower exposed the foolishness of teaching a doctrine that contradicts the Bible.
The Watchtower said, in what a jumble of contradictions and confusion do they find themselves who say that Jesus and the Father are one God?
This would involve the idea that our Lord Jesus acted the hypocrite one on earth and only pretended to address God in prayer when He Himself was the same God.
The Father has always been immortal hence could not die, how then could Jesus have died? The Scriptures declare however that He did die.
If they admit that Jesus really died they take the other horn of the dilemma for believing that their three gods are all one person as many do when Jesus died they must all three have died.
If they all died who raised them to life? How foolish all this sounds. Shall we thus contradict the apostles and prophets in Jesus Himself and ignore reason and common sense in order to hold to a dogma handed to us from the dark superstitious past by a corrupt apostate church?
Nay says the Watchtower. Well, Jehovah's people continue to uphold the excellencies of the only true God.
Whether in ancient times as with the natural Israelites or in modern times with spiritual Israel, Jehovah's words through Isaiah are still true.
Look at it, Isaiah chapter 43 and verse 21. Of course we know in Isaiah chapter 43 Jehovah declares you are my witnesses and in verse 27 or verse 21 he says the people whom I formed for myself so that they might declare my praise.
And the effort that Jehovah's witnesses, God's people have put forth to expose Bible teachings that are false to teach the truth about Jehovah and to sanctify God's name has taken on proportions never attained by any other religious group and Jehovah takes notice of that.
Malachi the third chapter Malachi chapter 3 beginning with verse 16 Malachi 3 16. At that time those who fear Jehovah spoke with one another each one of this companion and Jehovah kept paying attention and listening and a book of remembrance was written before him for those fearing Jehovah and for those meditating or the footnote says possibly
treasuring his name and they will be mine says Jehovah of armies in the day when I produce a special property. So Jehovah truly does love those who fear him and treasure his name making them truly God's people.
Jehovah can remove any obstacle to sanctifying his name and declaring the good news even long held false teachings and what is more amazing he uses his people his special property to get the work done.
The challenges may be different where you live but the results are the same Jehovah blesses your efforts to glorify him.
Let's see an example in this report from Peru where our brothers are reaching the hearts of Ketua speaking people in the Andes mountains.
My name is Faustino Camacho Quispe. My family and I speak Ketua or as we say Runa Simi the language of the people.
We live in an agricultural community in the mountains of Peru our way of life depends on farming. We grow crops such as corn, potatoes, wheat and quinoa.
We also raise a small amount of livestock. Many people who speak Ketua have moved to larger cities but others like us still enjoy a more traditional way of life in the country.
My family and I are Jehovah's Witnesses. Most of our brothers and sisters in this area would never have been able to learn the truth had there not been anyone sent here to preach in Ketua.
In 1992 the Peru branch office began to expand the work in the Ketua language field.
In order to reach those living in isolated areas zealous brothers and sisters climbed narrow roads in the frigid elevations of the Andes mountains.
Great efforts were made in order to bring Ketua speaking people the good news in their own language.
The people loved having publications in their mother tongue. However, there were some challenges carrying out this work.
One problem was not having a good translation of the holy scriptures in Ketua. The commonly used translations here in Peru omit God's name in the main text.
It can be found in the glossary of some bibles and sometimes we use that in order to preach. But even so, it didn't have the same impact as seeing it in its proper place.
That along with the influence of false doctrines made it difficult for us to teach the truth.
When we teach people about the Bible we want them to draw close to God. We want them to become his friends.
But no one can be God's friend if they don't know his name. For people to be able to come to love God they have to know his name and they have to understand what it means.
It was difficult for us to use the Bible in the meetings, in the field ministry and in our family worship.
How could Jehovah's great name be sanctified throughout this mountainous region? How could the Ketua people get to know God when his name was hidden?
The answer to our prayers came when Ketua congregations throughout the country were invited to a special program on May 1, 2016.
Imagine the great joy we felt when Brother Jackson of the governing body announced the release of the new world translation of the Christian Greek scriptures in two Ketua languages.
Language number 136. It's the Christian Greek scriptures in Ketua, Ayakucho.
Kekaya. Bibliantika Espero. Ayakuchanori may be.
But we also have number 137. It's Ketua Kustor.
That's that. Who's going to beat us?
One of the wonderful gifts we've received today.
There's new Ketua Bible. It's a grand victory for Jehovah's great name.
God's name is no longer hidden from the Ketua people, giving them the precious opportunity to come to know our loving creator, Jehovah.
I feel proud to use our new Bible to teach my family and neighbors Jehovah's name.
I am thankful every day that Jehovah sent this good news to the mountains to us who speak RunaSimi, the language of the people.
It was a privilege to be at such a happy event and to see our brothers' joy when they received the Christian Greek scriptures in two Ketua languages.
May they use their Bibles to draw close to Jehovah and glorify his name in the Andes Mountains.
Our program now goes to the South Pacific, where we conclude with greetings from Tuvalu.
Most of Tuvalu's nine islands are ring-shaped aralattles surrounding peaceful lagoons.
The small islands barely rise out of the sea.
On Phunau Flutti, Tuvalu's capital, the island is just wide enough in some places for the main road and a single house.
The motorbike is the preferred way to travel on the island, so it's good that our witnessing carts come equipped with sturdy wheels.
Tuvalu has a busy remote translation office.
In 2011, the new world translation of the Christian Greek scriptures in Tuvalu was released.
In October last year, the complete Bible was released, making Tuvalu and the smallest language group to receive the new world translation.
I was assigned to Tuvalu in 1979 and enjoyed the challenging task of helping to establish Tuvalu and translation.
There are only three other baptized publishers back then, but in 2017 Tuvalu reported a peak of 125 publishers.
They preached to a population of around 10,000 people.
Tuvaluans are warm and friendly and our brothers and sisters thoroughly enjoy the time they can spend together.
They send their love and greetings from the South Pacific.
I love how to and Tuvalu means we send our love to you all.
We send them our love and pray for Jehovah's continued blessing.
This is JW Broadcasting from the World Headquarters of Jehovah's Witnesses.